Okay, this is January 8th, 1981, and Eric and I are,
me as Bob Cornish, we are in the office of Kevin
Stowers at St. Edward's University in Austin,
Texas. Kevin is in charge of environmental
studies at St. Edward's, and he has been in Austin
for two and a half years, subsequent to having
taught at Utah State. for five years and before
that he was the assistant planning director in
Galveston which brings us to the point of this
interview we would like to ask you Kevin to give us
the benefit of your understanding and knowledge
about Galveston first and secondly would you like
to just take a look at these questions we've
provided for you One thing that I think that I need
to say about Galveston particularly that a lot of
people don't realize is that the historical
records of Galveston and particularly municipal
records in many cases are very poor and this is
because every time there's a major hurricane, a
number of records are lost. The records are
damaged. The historical tradition in Galveston
has been records are damaged. They're simply
carted out and hauled away rather than trying to be
preserved. This includes city council minutes,
ordinances, whatever. And of course, after each
disaster, there is a massive renovation and major
changes are made. So... Can we stop one minute?
Sure. Of course, all of you know historically
after the 1900 hurricane, which was a massive
disaster that leveled the town completely. There
were almost no buildings left standing. They were
undamaged. uh the outcome of that was they founded
a commission form of government which is one of
those rather strange little devices that you kind
of learn about that continued on for some time
we're going to be busy for a while okay and um the
outcome of that is that they continued under a
commission form of government for quite some
period of time. I don't know when officially they
moved from that commission form of government,
but in 1961 a new civic charter was adopted which
set up a city manager form of government. That is
what I would consider to be the time of new modern
planning, new modern administration in the city
of Galveston. The 61 Charter was also a response to
a disaster. They had a hurricane in 61. And so, you
know, what do we do? We have an opportunity for a
major change. There would have been the usual
problems with the commission form of government.
And at that stage in 61, They established a whole
series of citizen commissions, among which was
the Planning Commission, a Traffic Commission, a
Transportation Commission, and so forth and so
on. This apparently became the backbone and basis
for modern planning efforts in the city of
Galveston. And I really cannot speak very well for
what happened prior to that, because again, the
records were thrown out in 61. They got wet, and a
lot of them just simply got carried off. Also,
there's a tremendous storage problem. City Hall
is an older one, and they run out of space. And it
seems like with a lot of communities, nobody holds
these old records. You can't give them away. And so
if you're left with the prospect of continuing
your municipal operations, are ceasing them to
become an archive, most communities quite
naturally find a dumpster somewhere and get rid of
these things. And it helps when you get them wet and
they're damaged and they're going to deteriorate
anyway. That just spurs the movement on. So
Galveston, I think, is going to be a difficult
community to study in that sense. The first modern
plan, which I managed to figure out, is a Marvin
Springer. document, or the one that they were
operating under when I was there in 1973,
comprehensive plan in Port City of Galveston.
I don't know what they had prior to that. I somewhat
have a feeling, especially by what I saw sitting in
the planning offices in the storage room for the
drafting department, they were tending to
operate off a poster board and had never really,
you know, gone through a unified document
procedure up until that point. and these things
take time, so I don't know that 12 years later seems
like a long time to students, but on the other hand,
in reality, getting a plan adopted 12 years after
you initiate the process and procedures, that's
not too bad. I don't have the zoning ordinance. I
loaned it to a colleague who hasn't returned it,
and If I recall correctly, the zoning ordinance
was adopted in either 64 or 67 that they're
operating under, which was probably prior to the
Marvin Spranger plant, but it may have well been
based upon documents that had been adopted in a
more casual attitude and atmosphere for this
plant.
Is there any periodic review of the Springer plan?
Well, when I was there, yes. Now, of course,
there's a distinction between what a periodic
review in terms of citizen input hearings, you
know, a formal readoption by the city council, and
what the staffs do. I think inevitably the staffs
are always reviewing and updating these
documents. There's nothing else simply to keep
their engineering data, their population data,
their housing data up to date. Furthermore, it's
almost required that the data be updated simply in
terms of grant applications. And this was
something we were pursuing very hard when I was in
Galveston. We took the city from If I remember my
figures right, I had one year from $150,000 in
federal grants to something like $1.4 million.
When you do that, that involves massive inputs in
terms of document review and updating.
The systematic review of the document, when I was
there, it was a very modern document. It was only a
year or two old. And so therefore, we had not gone
through a five year review. It's my understanding
that the document is probably, from what I've
judged just reading and talking to a couple
people, has been reviewed in a very serious way in
the last year or two, but I would have to check with
my people in Galveston to find that out for sure.
What administrative
procedures and planning program elements does
Galveston have for implementing community
plans? At the present, I don't know. They've got a
planning department, I know that.
What about the manager's role? I mean, that seems
to have... Well, Galveston's been hard on
managers. As a matter of fact, good managers
frequently find other things to do in Galveston
within two or three years. Most managers do not
last very long in Galveston because they're
either competent and good and move on to better
things that are offered to them or else they're
fired. Why does this happen, Kevin, would you say?
I mean, clearly the council's fault here. Oh,
well, the council is certainly a representative
of the community and it represents that
cross-section in a very interesting manner. If
you look at Galveston, it's probably one of the
most diverse communities in the state of Texas. As
a matter of fact, when they looked at segregation
patterns, Galveston was listed as being one of the
most integrated cities in the United States in the
early 1960s. Well, in reality, those people are
not dealing with each other in terms of social
aspect. It's just such an old city that's so
compact and so many uses of land mixed together
that you can have part of a block being black, part
of it being white, and part being
Spanish-American without those people ever
really interacting and to say hello and nice to see
you. And this is one of the essential characters of
Galveston. It's a very compact, small island.
Also, there's a tremendous amount of wealth in
Galveston. Historically, it was the premier city
in the state of Texas until the 1900 storm, and
there's tremendous wealth there today. There is
also perhaps some of the most acute poverty
problems that you will ever see. When I was there,
the median education level for adults over the age
of 25, if I remember my statistics correctly, was
eighth grade. But it's got the University of Texas
Medical Branch there. It's got a junior college.
They've got a lot of major corporations and
headquarters there, financial institutions.
Yet, you know, here you have a very poorly educated
and functioning- You don't want to forget Texas
A&M's campus. Oh, no. I'm sorry. I keep forgetting
about them. It's hard to forget them. They keep
changing their mind what kind of sign they want. As
a result, the traffic people told them where they
could go with their sign and that sign was not going
to be changed again as long as there was a city of
Galveston. They had a name change recently, you
know. Yeah, well this was actually before that.
They kept trying to decide, you know, they wanted
to be capitals in which part of the school they
wanted to emphasize and, you know, what should
come first and on the side and, you know, so it got to
be the point it was kind of ridiculous. We keep
trying to get changes every six months to a year. It
gets expensive. That doesn't sound difficult,
does it? No, no. Things have changed. But
Galveston is a very diverse community, and
there's a lot of conflicts. Also, it's got a
tremendously sensitive environment. Before we
leave this point, though, I think it's
particularly critical of Galveston, from my
understanding, because they've gone through
umpteen city managers and planning directors and
planning staffs, and I think that we ought to
The
gentleman
that was there prior to my venue, which would be the
late 60s, early 70s, tried to undertake an urban
renewal program. I don't remember the guy's name.
He went to Mississippi. There's a great movement
along the coast, the southern coast of planter
directors that are moving to other similar
communities from their previous occupation.
Like Bruce. Yes. And the outcome was that There was
a lot of animosity created because Galveston
being a compact city, there's no way you can really
do anything without tearing something down. And
of course everybody knows what's going to be torn
down and there was a lot of real conservative
feeling politically in this period. He was not
successful in the referendum and getting the
urban renewal projects, programs pushed through
and accepted by the community.
He got little things like one-way airplane
tickets back to his home on the east coast in the
mail, which he promptly cashed in and threw a party
with for the staff. Somebody mailed that? Oh yes,
anonymously.
So there was a good feeling of animosity. At that
point, there was a lot of reorganization. There
was a feeling that Galveston was not getting its
due, that things needed to be done. And certain
progressive elements in the community, and you
can call them progressive or renegade or radical,
depending on what your view is, happened to me.
Well, the Moody Foundation, interestingly
enough, does like to see certain things done and is
a very powerful force in Galveston.
Mrs. Northern is quite a force. If you want to know
which religion to undertake, just see where she
puts her money and go accordingly. They may be
interested in funding the continuation of this
project. Yeah. Well, that's good. They are
interested in those types of things. That's the
kind of project they would fund. They would fund
libraries, cultural centers, historical
renovation, things of this nature. It's very
positive educational ventures, religious
ventures. They are a powerful force within
Galveston, and particularly But beyond that,
there was a lot of feeling that Galveston was not
going anywhere. It was being passed by. It hadn't
grown between 50 and 60, and the hurricane had
whopped it, and the 1970 census came out, and it
lost a little bit of population, and there was a lot
of concern about where Galveston was going to be in
the future. There's this old syndrome that if
you're not growing, there's something somehow
unhealthy about you as a community. And you have a
lot
of business interests in the community. Excuse
me. The house. Shook hands with all of you before I
told you. Oh, a little bit of illness in the house,
so I shook hands with all of you before I mentioned
it. Eric looks happy. But, oh, just a stomach bug,
cramps. Probably the flu. Yes, something. I'm not
sure what the symptoms of that. But
Galveston has this real concern over where it's
going in the future, and it didn't seem to be going
much of anywhere. It seemed to be the same old
place. There was not a lot of new investment, a lot
of people moving in, and it was very difficult to
get things done. At this stage, they hired a
community development director, Dean Mayberry,
spelled without a Y, M-A-B-E-R-R-Y.
out of Hartford, Connecticut, and he had been at
Hartford and New Haven running their programs up
there and had done some really dynamite things.
They had had a position open for some time and they
just couldn't get anybody hired and they
contacted him because he was very experienced in
taking older cities that seemed to be kind of
stabilizing and stagnating and turning things
around and getting things happening. uh he came in
and they took the city traffic engineer and made
him planning director and consolidated planning
and traffic engineering transportation which in
some ways actually makes some sense although I
wouldn't I would have chosen myself to be director
but I wasn't there at the time But it does make some
sense, and they put planning and traffic under the
Community Development Department. They gave
them systematic and concentrated code
enforcement, which are two federal programs that
have been undergoing, and were very unsuccessful
at getting much done. You know, it seemed like you
get a loan application and it sits there three
years later, you know, or every year they process
four or five, you know, instead of the 75 or 80 that
they should be shoving through. They gave them
building inspection under that program as well. I
came in about that stage as an intern, by the way,
out of A&M. They offered me, after I completed my
internship, a position as assistant director of
planning. We had a Harvard planning grad who was a
specialist in housing. Working for me, an
architecture student major out of A&M who was
working as a planner.
Usual sort of miscellaneous staff. We had a public
administration specialist working in the
department. So I and the Harvard were the two core
identified design or unit planners, which is no
big deal in and of itself. We also had the usual
secretarial staff, three or four people sitting
in our office, plus a couple of people in drafting
and graphics. And things began to happen, and the
decision, of course, was the dean was going to go
after federal funding. And we went after federal
funding in a very serious way. As a matter of fact,
if I remember right, we were the second community
in the Houston-Galliston area council to get,
say, our transit system shoved through and
approved by the council. We went after Community
Development Block Grants, which were just coming
out at that time, in 1974. We
looked very seriously at EDA, LEAA, everything
that had money attached to it. We wanted to try to
find some way to make use of it. and things began to
happen. There were a lot of things, money coming
in, a lot of things happening, and we had a very
confident city manager at the time, whose face I
remember for some reason right at the moment, his
name slips me, and just as everything was
beginning to look just fantastic about a year into
the program, And things were going along very
well, and lots of money's pouring into the city,
and lots of things are finally coming to fruition.
And we got an emergency medical system, you know,
took it away from the funeral homes finally. We
still have funeral homes that run ambulances and
college stationers. We have, we have funeral home
ambulances too. They're now hospitals. Very
good. The outcome of all of that was that the city
manager got a rather fabby kind of offer from one of
the accounting firms in town. He thought about it
and he took the position. for a much higher salary,
and he got to work 40 hours a week, and he got to go
home and see his family in the evening, and there
were no night meetings. And it was just wonderful,
and he's very happy about that. And at that stage, a
very interesting kind of thing happened. Under
the city charter in Galveston... Do you know what
year that was? Was that 62? No, this is 74. I mean 72.
Yeah. Under the city charter in Galveston, if they
can't make up their mind about what to do in terms of
a city manager, the finance director becomes the
acting city manager. Why it wouldn't be one of the
assistant city managers, I don't know, or
whatever. But the wisdom of the voters in 61
indicated the finance department was the logical
direction and step to go.
Well, they couldn't make up their mind. They had
applicants from all over because it looked like
things were finally turned around. Good things
were happening in Galveston. Salary scale was
quite reasonable in getting up there. And the
outcome was that out of these 30 or 50 or 60 or 80
wonderful applications, two people on staff
wanted it. One was Dean Mayberry, director of
community development. The other was Jack
Nicklaus or whatever his name was, not the golfer,
but
the director of finance. And as the negotiations
went on, and the city council hemmed and hawed and
wouldn't make up their mind about what to do, They
turned around and let Nicholas take it as acting
director. Well, of course, if somebody's acting
director for three or four months, and then they
have to make a decision who is likely to get the
position, acting director, if he hasn't screwed
it up royally.
Nicholas played some real dirty politics and
backstabbing, spread a lot of rumors, you know,
usual dirty municipal infighting. I don't know
anything about that. You don't know anything
about that? Coming from university. Yes, and that
never happens in universities, does it? No,
especially Catholic universities. No. And the
outcome is that Nicholas was appointed, Mayberry
did not get to nod, and it was obvious that because
of the nature of the fight that had occurred in the
campaign for the position, that Mayberry was
going to, although he was offered and everybody
wanted to stay on, everybody said wonderful
things about him, that, you know, he was not in a
position particularly to stay on. So, you know, he
dropped, let the ball drop, and within a week he had
a position for more money elsewhere, and he's
working in Waco now with with their mental health,
mental retardation unit, the last I heard. Now
that was a unit that had a scandal, and he went in and
ended up, I don't know if you remember back in the
mid-70s, it was a scandal, and giving funny
injections to patients, and not keeping records
on drugs, and oh yes, wonderful, typical good
Texas stuff. And so anyway, he got brought in to
clean that act up, and he had worked in Waco
previously, so he was kind of going home to him.
Nicholas, yeah, I was aware of that. He was among
those that kind of got it started way back in the 60s
in working community development. Anyway,
Nicholas took an interesting style of
management. Basically, the clothing style in the
city manager's office became leisure suits.
with jump boots that were bloused. Jump boots?
Jump boots. Military jump boots. Carrying police
shortwave radios on their hips so they could race
to any emergency in town. Yeah.
I took one look at that and I said, yeah, this is
weird. Now Jack had been a Marine back in Corita. He
had been a college football player and had been a
pro lineman for a year or two back in the early 50s
with the Baltimore Colts. And when he started
wearing leisure suits that were bloused with junk
boots and police band or short-wave radios, I kind
of looked at that and I said, this is a little
strange. Furthermore, I am sick and tired of
educating city managers. Every time we get a
program up and going, the city manager comes in and
we educate him and get his support and things go
along real nicely and smoothly. And then he quits
and goes elsewhere. Well, I finally thought about
it for a while, and I was really disgusted because
I'd gotten three or four things I'd been working
real hard on that had been busted partly as part of
the disruption from the transition. And I got a
phone call one day saying, hi, this is Carlisle
Becker at Utah State calling, and we hear that you
might be interested in teaching the university.
And I said, sure. Fly me up, talk to me, and make me a
money offer. And they did. And I did. I went. I quit.
Most of the planners on staff quit. One planner got
sucked in, Danny Fred, who was the housing man,
downstairs at the city manager's office. I'm not
sure what his job ultimately became, but he worked
downstairs for a year, year and a half, making very
good money. And Jack managed to show his political
acumen by running a budget deficit of something
like a half million dollars. One year. Now, in a
community the size of Galveston, a half million
dollars does attract attention. And he got
canned, strangely enough. And Danny, who I got
this information from, says, well... being
single and from a wealthy family, it's time that I
take a year or two and recuperate from all of this
rather hard work and frayed nerves and so forth.
And so he resigned and he lived in, pardon me, Danny
Fred, one of the other planners that go down to the
city manager's office. He resigned, went out to
San Francisco and lived out there for a year or two
before he got another job, you know, just living
off his savings. And then he got a job somewhere in
the Midwest, I think in Ohio, I don't know. And so at
that stage, I lost contact with Galveston other
than I hear Bruce says there's never been any
planning done in Galveston, which is nice because
if you look at the original city plan, be it
engineering, civil engineering or not, you'll
see that they've got an old map in here showing the
original city as it was laid out by our friendly
survey. Yeah. So, you know, it certainly was a
planned community in every sense of the world in
1836 when it became a city. And I think the level of
planning that's occurred there, you know,
certainly rigid subdivisions, the seagull, you
can see very definite strong engineering and
planning type responses. Now certainly that's
not modern planning in any sense of the word, but on
the other hand, you know there's been a lot of
things done and it reflects and i think it shows in
the community it's kind of a strange community in a
lot of ways but you know there it is so that's where
we've been with the city for some time and i don't
know what they've done since then they do have some
physical and environmental problems that are
just absolutely phenomenal that may wind up
finally crippling the city in a total sense. My
feeling in the time I was there was the city had no
business being there. I never said that when I was
there. That was an unacceptable position. But the
entire city is basically in a flood plain except
for the area right on top of the seawall. The flood
frequency from hurricanes is one hurricane hits
there once every 10 years. The entire city
basically goes under water. The area is subject to
subsidence from the Houston-Galveston region.
It relies on underground water from out to Loma
Wells on the mainland, and it pumps water over to
the island. And it's suffering a very serious
coastal erosion problem, which was observable,
and it was a problem when I was there that
apparently has accelerated to as much as 25 feet
per year on parts of the island.
So, and when you consider the island at Twyatt
Point is about two miles, two and a half miles
across, you've got some very interesting things
happening. In terms of my long-term view, I would
not live on Galveston Island. I might, if I was
wealthy, I might buy a house behind the seawall if I
could find one that was available.
It's probably not the kind of community you want to
be looking at in terms of long-term investments.
Now, there's a lot of money there and a lot of ways to
make money, so people will go there and they'll
live there. It's got a lot of very desirable things
about it, climate, beach, water recreation. And
this is the real problem with the Texas coast.
Those islands happen to be where you can get to the
beach. That's where your recreational potential
is. South Padre Island's got exactly the same
problem, except that it hasn't been there for 150,
175 years.
There's no record of who did the first plat on the
coast. Is there? Who's responsible for the
design? Because there is some design in this. Oh,
yes. Yeah, there are some books on the history of
Galveston that are available in the library. I
don't recall the guy's name now that laid out the
city. But yeah, certainly it is a very definitely
designed city. And you can look at it very
thoroughly. There are some features in it that
remind me of Savannah. Yeah. Well, you've got a
major boulevard coming into town. You have
basically a major drive along the beach.
open spaces yeah you've got regularly spaced open
spaces some of which do not exist anymore you've
got parks that are included you have essentially
the urban area that's developed smaller city
blocks the outlined areas that were viewed as
being truck farm areas since then there have been
roads cut these have become like avenue p and a half
their only numeric letter system grid system a
very strong physical engineering sense of design
very good